Add environment docs landing page with essential info (#10043)
NVIDIA/cccl: docs/cub/environment.rst

> .. _cub-environment:

Reviewer: Important: Please also link to this page right at the end of this section: https://nvidia.github.io/cccl/unstable/cub/device_wide.html#environment-api-single-phase. Maybe add a sentence there:
```rst
Further information on CUB execution environments can be found :ref:`here <cub-environment>`_.
```

Execution Environments
======================

Most CUB device-wide algorithms accept an optional *execution environment* as their last
argument. The environment is a single object that bundles everything CUB needs to know
about *how* to run the algorithm: which stream to use, where to get temporary memory, what
reproducibility guarantees to apply, which tuning policy to select etc.

This page explains what the CUB environment APIs are, and how to use them. The main
properties an environment carries, each optional and freely composable with the others,
are:

1. :ref:`Streams <cub-env-building>` — select the stream the algorithm runs on.
2. :ref:`Determinism requirements <cub-env-determinism>` — request a reproducibility
   guarantee for the algorithm's results.
3. :ref:`Custom tuning policy <cub-env-tuning>` — override CUB's built-in kernel tuning

>    for the current device.

Reviewer: I try to establish the term "policy selector", since that's what we are passing. Selectors return tuning policies.
```suggestion
3. :ref:`Custom tuning policy selectors <cub-env-tuning>` — override CUB's built-in tuning parameters.
```

4. :ref:`Memory resources <cub-env-memory-resource>` — control where temporary storage
   is allocated from.

This list is not exhaustive: a few algorithms accept additional, algorithm-specific
requirements — e.g. tie-breaking and output-ordering controls for
:ref:`cub::DeviceTopK <cub-topk-requirements>` — and the set of properties an environment
can carry keeps growing.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Why environments?
-----------------

The classic two-phase CUB API requires three steps: query temporary-storage size, allocate,
then execute. That is fine for one-off calls, but it becomes repetitive once you need to

> attach a custom stream or a memory pool.

Reviewer: I don't understand this argument. The two-step API is not complicated by having a custom stream or memory pool. 

```suggestion
then execute. That is fine for situations where precise control over the temporary storage allocation is required,
or when the temporary storage size needs to be queried independently of allocating it.
For example, when the temporary storage is combined with other storage, e.g. for an output, into a single allocation.
But in many cases this is not needed and the two-step API is just repetitive boilerplate.
```

:ref:`determinism requirements <cub-env-determinism>`,
:ref:`custom tuning policies <cub-env-tuning>`, and
:ref:`memory resources <cub-env-memory-resource>`. All properties are optional and freely
composable with each other.

This page explains what the CUB environment APIs are, and how to use them.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Why environments?
-----------------

The classic two-phase CUB API requires three steps: query temporary-storage size, allocate,
then execute. That is fine for one-off calls, but it becomes repetitive once you need to
attach a custom stream or a memory pool.

The environment-based single-phase API collapses all of that into one call. The algorithm
queries the environment for the properties it needs — for example, the stream to run on,
or a memory resource to allocate temporary storage from — and then executes. Properties
an algorithm does not use are simply ignored, which is what makes one environment safe to
pass to many different algorithms:

.. code-block:: c++

   cub::DeviceReduce::Sum(d_input, d_output, num_items, env);

.. note::

   A byproduct of the environment overloads is that the environment argument is entirely

>    optional: since it is defaulted, an algorithm can be invoked with no temporary-storage

Reviewer: Let's try to avoid the term "environment overload" since we are replacing all `cudaStream_t` parameters by environments as well. In the end, every CUB device API will be an environment API.

```suggestion
   The environment argument is entirely
   optional: since it is defaulted, an algorithm can be invoked with no temporary-storage
```

   arguments and no environment at all, and every property falls back to its default
   (see :ref:`Fallback behavior <cub-environment-fallback>`):

   .. code-block:: c++

      cub::DeviceReduce::Sum(d_input, d_output, num_items);

.. _cub-env-building:

Building an environment
-----------------------

.. list explicitly what types are valid environments
Some types are already valid environments on their own and can be passed directly to an
algorithm. The most common case is a stream: ``cuda::stream_ref`` (or a raw
``cudaStream_t``) passed as the last argument is treated as an environment containing
just that stream.

.. literalinclude:: ../../cub/test/catch2_test_device_reduce_env_api.cu
   :language: c++
   :dedent:
   :start-after: example-begin reduce-env-stream
   :end-before: example-end reduce-env-stream

When you need more than one property, combine them with ``cuda::std::execution::env``.

> Properties are listed in any order; CUB queries each one independently. The example below

Reviewer: Suggestion: "CUB queries each one independently" does not add anything here I think
```suggestion
Properties can be listed in any order. The example below
```

composes a stream, a memory pool for temporary storage, and a determinism requirement
(the required declarations are provided by ``<cuda/execution>``, ``<cuda/stream>``,
``<cuda/memory_pool>``, and ``<cuda/devices>``):

.. literalinclude:: ../../cub/examples/device/example_device_reduce_env.cu
   :language: c++
   :dedent:
   :start-after: example-begin env-overload-setup
   :end-before: example-end env-overload-setup

.. literalinclude:: ../../cub/examples/device/example_device_reduce_env.cu
   :language: c++
   :dedent:
   :start-after: example-begin env-overload-run
   :end-before: example-end env-overload-run

The same ``env`` object can be passed to multiple algorithm calls without rebuilding it each
time, see :ref:`cub-environment-reuse`.

How to use environments
-----------------------

The controls below are what environments enable beyond the classic API. A few algorithms
additionally accept algorithm-specific controls — e.g. tie-breaking and output-ordering
for :ref:`cub::DeviceTopK <cub-topk-requirements>`. The set of supported properties
keeps growing.

.. _cub-env-determinism:

Determinism requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Use ``cuda::execution::require`` to request a reproducibility guarantee:

Reviewer: Suggestion: I imagine there could be more requirements in the future, so let's word determinism as an example:
```suggestion
Use ``cuda::execution::require`` to request a guarantee, like a reproducible/deterministic execution:
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../cub/test/catch2_test_device_reduce_env_api.cu
   :language: c++
   :dedent:
   :start-after: example-begin reduce-env-determinism
   :end-before: example-end reduce-env-determinism

Three levels are available, in increasing strictness: ``not_guaranteed``, ``run_to_run``,
and ``gpu_to_gpu``. The meaning of each guarantee is described in the
:ref:`CCCL determinism overview <cccl-determinism>`; which algorithms support which levels,
and each algorithm's default, are listed in the :ref:`CUB determinism support matrix
<cub-determinism>`. Requesting a level an algorithm does not support is rejected at

> compile time.

Reviewer: Suggestion: I think this information should rather be present on the cccl-determinism page and not duplicated hear. I generally try to avoid repeating information, since it will get out of sync over time.

```suggestion
Multiple determinism levels are available. The meaning of each is described in the
:ref:`CCCL determinism overview <cccl-determinism>`.
```

.. _cub-env-tuning:

Custom tuning policy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Pass a custom policy selector through the environment to override CUB's built-in tuning.
A policy selector answers the question "which tuning parameters should this algorithm use
on this GPU?": it is a function object that CUB calls with the GPU's compute capability,
and that returns the tuning parameters — threads per block, items per thread, and so on —

> packed in the algorithm's policy struct (here ``cub::MergePolicy``):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packaged as the algorithm's policy (here ``cub::MergePolicy``):
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../cub/test/catch2_test_device_merge_env_api.cu
   :language: c++
   :dedent:
   :start-after: example-begin merge-keys-policy-selector
   :end-before: example-end merge-keys-policy-selector

The selector is wrapped with ``cuda::execution::tune`` and passed as (part of) the
environment:

.. literalinclude:: ../../cub/test/catch2_test_device_merge_env_api.cu
   :language: c++
   :dedent:
   :start-after: example-begin merge-keys-tuning
   :end-before: example-end merge-keys-tuning

.. warning::

   The policy selector must be stateless (``std::is_empty_v<T> == true``). CUB passes only

>    its *type* to device kernels, so any captured state would be silently lost.

Reviewer: Suggestion: I believe this information should also only be listed on the `cub-policy-selectors` page. If it's not there, it should be added there. I think it's too much detail here.

.. seealso:: :ref:`cub-policy-selectors` - full guide on defining and composing policy
   selectors.

.. _cub-env-memory-resource:

Memory resources
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The memory resource controls where an algorithm's temporary storage is allocated from.
Memory resource types are valid environments on their own, so they can be passed directly
or composed with other properties:

.. code-block:: c++

   auto pool = cuda::device_default_memory_pool(cuda::devices[0]);

   // Pass directly...
   cub::DeviceReduce::Sum(d_input, d_output, num_items, pool);

   // ...or compose with other properties

>    auto env = cuda::std::execution::env{cuda::stream_ref{stream}, pool};

Reviewer: Suggestion: `stream` is probably already an environment ;)
```suggestion
   auto env = cuda::std::execution::env{stream, pool};
```

   cub::DeviceReduce::Sum(d_input, d_output, num_items, env);

Temporary storage is allocated from the memory resource on the algorithm's stream before
execution and released on the same stream afterwards. When no memory resource is present

> in the environment, CUB falls back to a stream-ordered ``cudaMallocAsync`` allocator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the environment, CUB falls back to a stream-ordered ``cudaMallocAsync``/``cudaFree`` allocator
```
It would be good if this allocator would be a public type eventually so we can just name it here. It's `cub::detail::device_memory_resource` currently.

(see :ref:`Fallback behavior <cub-environment-fallback>`).

.. TODO: Add Guarantees sub-section after #9278 is merged.

.. _cub-environment-reuse:

Reusing an environment across multiple calls
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An ``env`` object is copyable and movable. Build it once and pass it to as many algorithm

> calls as you like:

Reviewer: An environment is not necessarily copy- or movable. That depends on the types it contains. I think that is just a side effect because we build environments from view/handle types, like `stream_ref` etc.

Also, CUB should not require the environment to be copyable. We are trying to change all env-overloads to take the environment by `const&`.

I think we should just not talk about this propery:

```suggestion
An ``env`` object can be built once and passed to as many algorithm
calls as you like:
```

.. code-block:: c++

>    auto stream = cuda::stream{cuda::devices[0]};
>    auto pool   = cuda::device_default_memory_pool(cuda::devices[0]);
>    auto env    = cuda::std::execution::env{cuda::stream_ref{stream}, pool};

Reviewer: I believe this would work as well:
```suggestion
   auto stream = cuda::stream{cuda::devices[0]};
   auto pool   = cuda::device_default_memory_pool(cuda::devices[0]);
   auto env    = cuda::std::execution::env{std::move(stream), pool};
```
I think this would create a non-copyable environment (since the `stream` cannot be copied), but it would work with CUB.

Reviewer: I just tested it. It works after we moved all environment parameters to `const&` in `cub::DeviceReduce`.

Author: the example calls `stream.sync()` at the end, would that work fine on a moved-on `stream`?

Reviewer: Right, it would not ;)

   cub::DeviceScan::ExclusiveSum(d_a, d_out_a, n, env);
   cub::DeviceReduce::Sum(d_b, d_out_b, n, env);
   cub::DeviceSelect::If(d_c, d_out_c, d_num_selected, n, my_predicate, env);

   stream.sync();

All three calls share the same stream and memory pool. Temporary storage is allocated and
released from the pool independently for each call.

.. note::

   When a tuning policy is embedded in the environment, the *same* policy applies to every
   call that uses that environment. If two algorithms in the same pipeline need different

>    tunings, build separate environments or use separate ``cuda::execution::tune`` properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   When a tuning policy selector is embedded in the environment, it applies to *every*
   algorithm that can be tuned by this selector. For example, a policy selector returning a `cub::ReducePolicy`
   will be used by all calls to `cub::DeviceReduce::*` that use the same environment.
   If two algorithms using the same environment need different
   tunings, build separate environments.
```

Reference
---------

> 

Reviewer: Suggestion: I would not need this heading
```suggestion
```

.. _cub-environment-fallback:

Fallback behavior
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The environment argument is optional on every algorithm that supports it. CUB applies the
following defaults when a property is absent from the environment (or when no environment
is passed at all):

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 75

   * - Property
     - Default when absent
   * - Stream
     - The CUDA null stream (``cudaStreamDefault``), which synchronizes with all other streams
       on the current device.
   * - Memory resource
     - A stream-ordered allocator based on ``cudaMallocAsync``. Temporary storage is
       allocated on the stream the algorithm runs on.
   * - Determinism

>      - Algorithm-specific, typically ``run_to_run``. See :ref:`cub-determinism`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Algorithm-specific. See :ref:`cub-determinism`.
```

   * - Tuning policy
     - CUB's built-in architecture-tuned default for the current device.

Missing properties never cause an error. The algorithm simply falls back to its default for
that property.

Environment building blocks
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These are the utilities a user needs to construct environments:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60

   * - Utility
     - Purpose
   * - ``cuda::std::execution::env{props...}``
     - Compose multiple properties into one environment object.
   * - ``cuda::execution::require(property)``
     - Wrap a requirement (e.g. a determinism level) so that an algorithm enforces rather
       than hints it.
   * - ``cuda::execution::tune(selector)``

>      - Embed a custom policy selector into an environment.

Reviewer: Suggestion: I think this can be skipped. We already mentioned `env`, `require` and `tune`.
